Waste Discharge Requirements General Order R5-2013-0120-09 	8
Growers within the Tulare Lake Basin Area
September 2013 – Last Revised April 2021
areas based on definitions provided in Attachment E to this Order and guidance provided 
in the MRP for development of the Groundwater Quality Assessment Report. The 
Executive Officer will review Third-Party proposed high and low vulnerability areas and 
make the final determination of these areas. High and low vulnerability areas will be 
reviewed and updated throughout the implementation of this Order. A Member who is 
covered under this Order must comply with MRP Order R5-2013-0120-09 which is part of 
this Order, and future revisions thereto by the Executive Officer or Board.
25. The surface water quality monitoring and trend groundwater quality monitoring under this 
Order are regional and representative in nature and do not measure individual field 
discharge. The surface water quality monitoring will take place in surface water bodies 
that are representative of surface waters receiving irrigated agricultural discharges. The 
trend groundwater monitoring will take place in aquifers that are representative of 
aquifers receiving irrigated agricultural discharges. The benefits of regional monitoring 
include the ability to determine whether water bodies accepting discharges from 
numerous irrigated lands are meeting water quality objectives and to determine whether 
practices, at the watershed level, are protective of water quality. There is a cost savings 
with representative monitoring, since all surface waters or all groundwater aquifers that 
receive irrigated agricultural discharges do not need to be monitored. Surface water and 
groundwater monitoring sites are selected to represent areas with similar conditions (e.g., 
crops grown, soil type). However, there are limitations to regional monitoring’s 
effectiveness in determining possible sources of water quality problems, the effectiveness 
of management practices, and individual compliance with this Order’s requirements.
Therefore, through the reporting and evaluation of applied nitrogen versus removed 
nitrogen, the Management Practices Evaluation Program, development and utilization of 
Groundwater Protection Targets, Surface Water Quality Management Plans, and 
Groundwater Quality Management Plans, the Third-Party must evaluate the effectiveness 
of management practices in protecting water quality. In addition, Members must report 
the practices they are implementing to protect water quality and comply with Surface and 
Groundwater Quality Management Plans as applicable. Through the evaluations and 
studies conducted by the Third-Party, the reporting of applied and removed nitrogen as 
well as the management practices used by the Members, and the Board’s compliance 
and enforcement activities, the Board will be able to determine whether a Member is 
complying with the Order.
Where required monitoring and evaluation does not allow the Central Valley Water Board 
to determine potential sources of water quality problems or identify whether management 
practices are effective, this Order requires the Third-Party to provide technical reports at 
the direction of the Executive Officer. Such technical reports are needed when monitoring 
or other available information is not sufficient to determine the effects of irrigated 
agricultural waste discharges to state waters. It may also be necessary for the Central 
Valley Water Board to conduct investigations by obtaining information directly from 
Members to address individual compliance.
26. The Basin Plan designates beneficial uses, establishes water quality objectives, contains 
programs of implementation needed to achieve water quality objectives, and references  